docs: rbac getting started guide (#48029)
gravitational/teleport: docs/pages/admin-guides/access-controls/getting-started.mdx

---
title: Getting Started With Role-Based Access Control
description: Teleport Role-Based Access Control.
---

In Teleport, RBAC (Role-Based Access Control) is a system that helps you manage who can access various resources such as databases, SSH servers, Kubernetes clusters, Windows desktops, and web apps. 

> ## What is RBAC in Teleport?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
The first couple of sections are very short, so I think we can consolidate them.

> In Teleport, any local, SSO, or robot user can be assigned one or several roles. Roles govern access to your resources and infrastructure.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A Teleport user can be assigned one or several roles. Roles govern access to your resources and infrastructure.
```
Since we don't introduce the distinction between kinds of users until later in this page

Each role defines specific permissions to ensure that users only have access to what they need. 

> ## What is a role?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
Since the first few sections are short, I think we can consolidate them.

Roles determine what resources a user can access and what actions they can perform within the system. 

By creating and assigning roles, administrators can enforce security policies, manage access, and ensure users have the appropriate level of privileges based on their responsibilities.

> ## Teleport users

Reviewer: Would it make sense to focus this guide on roles and label matching and, rather than spell out the kinds of users here, link to the [User Types](https://pr-48029.d3pp5qlev8mo18.amplifyapp.com/docs/reference/user-types) reference in a "Further reading" or "Next steps" section?

Reviewer: @mmcallister What do you think about the comment above? In general, I think this guide should be a lot more focused. I would start by identifying the objective of the guide in the intro paragraph (making it as narrow as possible), then editing the structure of the guide based on that objective. How does that sound?

Users are entities that can authenticate and interact with the resources within a Teleport cluster. These users can have different levels of access depending on the roles assigned to them. 

Teleport supports both internal users and external users, which differ mainly in how they authenticate and how they are managed.

> ### Internal users

Reviewer: I would standardize on "local" and "SSO" users instead of "internal" and "external":

```
grep -hREoi "(internal|external|local|SSO) user" docs/pages | tr '[:upper:]' '[:lower:]'| sort | uniq -c
  13 external user
   1 internal user
 131 local user
  29 sso user
```

Internal users can authenticate using credentials managed within Teleport, such as:
- Username and password
- Multi-factor authentication (MFA), such as TOTP (time-based one-time passwords)

Internal users are assigned roles that define what resources they can access and what actions they can perform within the cluster. They are typically used for small to mid-size deployments where user management 
is handled directly in Teleport without relying on external identity providers.

### External users

External users authenticate using external Identity Providers (IdP), such as Okta, Google, GitHub, Microsoft Entra ID, or other SAML/OIDC providers. These users do not manage their passwords or credentials within Teleport itself. Instead, they authenticate using their external SSO credentials. For example, a user in the "admin" group in Okta can be mapped to the admin role in Teleport. 

External users are useful for larger organizations or those that want to centralize identity management via an existing SSO provider. This is often preferred for enterprise environments where identity management is handled outside Teleport.

> ### Robots

Reviewer: The Machine ID section of the docs calls these "bot users".

Machine ID provides machines with an identity that can authenticate to the Teleport cluster. This identity is known as a robot. Robots are represented in Teleport by a user and a role resource and can be created via the tctl bots add command. Unlike human users, who use a password, MFA, or SSO, robot users join the cluster as Teleport services using a join method. They can still join even if local auth is disabled.

See the [Machine ID introduction](../../enroll-resources/machine-id/introduction.mdx) for more information.

## Teleport roles

Some examples of roles include:

- **access**: Grants basic access to resources.
- **editor**: Allows users to modify configuration settings.

> - **auditor**: Allows users to view logs and auditing activities.

Reviewer: Is there a way to merge this with our table of preset roles? Otherwise, it's not clear to me what we're referring to when we talk about these particular roles

Roles enforce Role-Based Access Control (RBAC), ensuring that users only have the permissions needed for their specific tasks. 
See [Teleport Access Controls Reference](../../reference/access-controls/roles.mdx) for in-depth information about types of roles, options, and usage.

> ## Understanding Teleport’s Resource Tagging and Matching

Reviewer: We use sentence case in headings: https://github.com/gravitational/docs/blob/main/docs-contributors/style-guide.md#headings

Before configuring RBAC, it’s essential to understand how Teleport tags and matches resources to users’ roles.

> - Resource Tagging: Teleport uses labels (key-value pairs) to tag resources like SSH nodes, databases, or Kubernetes clusters. For example, a server might have the label env: production.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Resource Tagging: Teleport uses labels (key-value pairs) to tag resources like SSH nodes, databases, or Kubernetes clusters. For example, a server might have the label `env: production`.
```
Otherwise, this is difficult to read as regular text

> - Role Matching: A role in Teleport allows or denies access to resources based on matching these labels. For instance, if a user has a role that allows access to resources labeled env: staging, they will only access resources with that label.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Role matching: A role in Teleport allows or denies access to resources based on matching these labels. For instance, if a user has a role that allows access to resources labeled `env: staging`, they will only access resources with that label.
```
- Using code style for key/value pairs
- "Role matching" isn't a proper noun

You can use this labeling and matching logic to grant users specific access, ensuring they only interact with the resources they need.

## Understanding Teleport’s YAML Configuration

> Teleport’s roles are defined using YAML. Here’s a breakdown of a basic role configuration:

Reviewer: `tctl` reads YAML, but you can also manage roles with Terraform, the Teleport Kubernetes operator, and other API clients.

- **kind**: The type of resource being created. For roles, this will always be role.
- **metadata**: Includes information like the role’s name, which is used to identify the role.
- **spec**: This section defines what the role can and cannot do.
- **allow**: Lists the permissions the role grants, such as allowed logins or access to resources based on labels.
- **deny**: Specifies any permissions that should be explicitly denied, even if they would otherwise be allowed.

> ##  Creating a Basic Role for SSH Access

Reviewer: I would make the guide more focused as a how-to guide or a conceptual guide, rather than bringing together features of both of them (see the [style guide](https://github.com/gravitational/docs/blob/main/docs-contributors/style-guide.md#organizing-information-into-purpose-driven-documents)).

- (!docs/pages/includes/edition-prereqs-tabs.mdx!)

### Step 1/3

Let’s set up a simple role that gives users access to staging servers for SSH access. Create a role definition file called staging-access.yaml with the following content:

```yaml
kind: role
version: v7
metadata:
  name: staging-access
spec:
  allow:
    logins: ['dev']
    node_labels:
      'env': 'staging'
  deny:
    node_labels:
      'env': 'production'

```

### Step 2/3

Apply this role using the following command:

```code
$ tctl create -f staging-access.yaml
```
This role allows the user to log in as the `dev` user to servers labeled with `env: staging` and explicitly denies access to any server labeled `env: production`.

### Step 3/3

Assigning the Role to a User

Now that you’ve created a role, assign it to a local user named Alice:

```code
$ tctl users add alice --roles=staging-access
```

Alice can now log in to staging servers, but she will be blocked from production environments.

> ## Add local users with preset roles

Reviewer: I'm not sure about the place of this section within the guide. Is it meant as a set of instructions or a conceptual description?

It's possible to map an SSO user to preset roles, so if we want to use this section to lay out the preset roles, I would make it about that and remove the local user aspect.

Teleport provides several preset roles:

(!docs/pages/includes/preset-roles-table.mdx!)

Invite the local user Alice as cluster `editor`:

```code
$ tctl users add alice --roles=editor
```

Invite the local user Alice as cluster `editor` and `reviewer`:

```code
$ tctl users add alice --roles=editor,reviewer
```

Once Alice signs up, she will be able to edit cluster configuration. You can list
users and their roles using `tctl users ls`.

```code
$ tctl users ls

# User                 Roles
# -------------------- --------------
# alice                editor, reviewer
```

You can update the user's roles using the `tctl users update` command:

```code
$ tctl users update alice --set-roles=editor,auditor
```

Once Alice logs back in, she will be able to view audit logs.

```code
$ tctl users update alice --set-roles=editor,reviewer,auditor
```

Because Alice has two or more roles, permissions from those roles create a union. She will be able to act as a system administrator and auditor at the same time.

> ## Create a custom role

Reviewer: Same question as above re: the "Add local users with preset roles" section. I am not sure whether to treat this as a conceptual description or a how-to instruction. Is this an example of using label matching as the guide describes earlier?

Author: The idea was to provide basic steps to get started and to get new users familiar with these topics, such as labeling, and access.

--- 
title: Getting Started With Role-Based Access Control
description: Teleport Role-Based Access Control.
tocDepth: 3
---

Teleport RBAC (Role-Based Access Control) is a system for managing who can
access what within your infrastructure. Instead of assigning permissions
directly to users, you create roles that define sets of permissions, then assign
those roles to users.

> This guide helps you understand and implement Role-Based Access Control (RBAC)

Reviewer 2: I think the most common thing is to spell out the acronym on first use, and then use the acronym going forward.

I would update line 7 tog spell out RBAC before using the acronym, and then use only the acronym here.

  want to register servers in Teleport without using Docker, see the getting
  started guide for [server
  access](../../enroll-resources/server-access/getting-started.mdx).

## Step 1/2. Enroll resources with labels

In this section, you will enroll two servers with your Teleport cluster. One
server will have the `env:local-dev` label and the other will have the
`env:local-prod`.  Later in this guide, you will create a role that will allow a
user to access a server with the `env:local-dev` label and deny access to the
`env:local-prod` label.

### Enroll a server with the `env:local-dev` label

1. Create a join token for the server to use to join the cluster:

   ```code
   $ tctl tokens add --type=node
   ```

1. Assign the token to <Var name="token" /> and the host and web port of your
   Teleport Proxy Service to <Var name="example.teleport.sh:443" />.

1. Copy the following Teleport configuration to a file called `local-dev.yaml`:

   ```yaml
   version: v3
   teleport:
     data_dir: /var/lib/teleport
     join_params:
       token_name: <Var name="token" />
       method: token
     proxy_server: <Var name="example.teleport.sh:443" />
   auth_service:

>      enabled: "no"

Reviewer 2: I think we just merged a PR to change these yes/no values to true/false. Let's not undo those changes by adding more of the old style.

   ssh_service:
     enabled: "yes"
     labels:
       env: local-dev
   proxy_service:
     enabled: "no"
   ```

   This Teleport configuration enables the Teleport SSH Service, which enrolls a
   server in your Teleport cluster. The `ssh_service.labels` field adds a label
   to the server called `env:local`.

1. Assign the absolute path to the configuration file you created to 
   <Var name="dev-config-path"/>.

1. Start the Teleport SSH Service on a local Docker container with the
   configuration and join it to your cluster:

   ```code
   $ docker run -v <Var name="dev-config-path"/>:/etc/teleport/teleport.yaml (=teleport.latest_ent_debug_docker_image=)
   ```

1. Wait for a minute or so. Ensure that the server has joined your cluster by
   listing enrolled servers by label. You should see the server you just
   enrolled:

   ```code

>    $ tsh ls env=local-dev

Reviewer 2: Do we need to tell/teach the user about `tsh login` first, or do we assume they've already logged in?

Author: Added a bit for this

   Node Name    Address    Labels
   ------------ ---------- -------------
   80f60427d316 ⟵ Tunnel   env=local-dev   
   ```

### Enroll a server with the `env:local-prod` label

1. Open a separate terminal.

1. Create a join token for the server to use to join the cluster:

   ```code
   $ tctl tokens add --type=node
   ```

> 1. Assign the token to <Var name="token2" />.

Reviewer 2: Would it simplify the guide to reuse the same token?

   version: v3
   teleport:
     data_dir: /var/lib/teleport
     join_params:
       token_name: <Var name="token2" />
       method: token
     proxy_server: <Var name="example.teleport.sh:443" />
   auth_service:
     enabled: "no"
   ssh_service:
     enabled: "yes"
     labels:
       env: local-prod
   proxy_service:
     enabled: "no"
   ```

1. Assign the absolute path to the configuration file you created to 
   <Var name="prod-config-path" />.

1. Start the Teleport SSH Service on a local Docker container with the
   configuration and join it to your cluster:

   ```code
   $ docker run -v <Var name="prod-config-path" />:/etc/teleport/teleport.yaml (=teleport.latest_ent_debug_docker_image=)
   ```

1. Ensure that the server has joined the cluster:

   ```code
   $ tsh ls env=local-prod
   Node Name    Address    Labels
   ------------ ---------- --------------
   ba2290caf694 ⟵ Tunnel   env=local-prod
   ```

## Step 2/3. Create a Teleport role

Create a role that can access servers with the `env:local-dev` label but not the
`env:local-prod` label.

1. Create a file called `role.yaml` with the following content:

   ```yaml
   kind: role
   version: v7
   metadata:

>      name: local-dev-access

Reviewer 2: Maybe we should call this `local-dev-only`, because the deny rule means the user will never be able to access prod.

Or maybe we should change the label matcher to `env: local-dev` and remove the deny rule to make the first role the user develops as simple as possible.

Author: Removed the deny rule

   spec:
     allow:

>        logins: ['root']
>        node_labels:
>          'env': 'local-*'
>      deny:
>        node_labels:
>          'env': 'local-prod'

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
       logins: [root]
       node_labels:
         env: local-*
     deny:
       node_labels:
         env: local-prod
```

I don't think any of these quotes are necessary.

Author: Deleted quotes

   $ tsh ls
   Node Name    Address    Labels
   ------------ ---------- -------------
   ba2290caf694 ⟵ Tunnel   env=local-dev
   ```

   Since `alice` is denied access to servers with the `env:local-prod` label,
   only the server with the `env:local-dev` label is available to connect to.

1. Access the server using the value of the `Node Name` field as shown in `tsh
   ls`:

   ```code
   $ tsh ssh root@<Var name="ba2290caf694" />
   ```

## Next steps

In this guide, you created a Teleport role that allowed and denied access to SSH
servers based on the labels that the servers were enrolled with. Read about more
things you can do with Teleport roles.

### Refine resource labels

Resource labeling is a crucial component of effective RBAC implementation in Teleport. Labels help you define which specific 
resources users can access and why they need that access. Some common labels to consider using:

- Environment (`dev`, `staging`, `production`)
- Team ownership (`backend`, `frontend`, `data`)
- Project or application (`auth-service`, `billing-api`)
- Cost center or business unit (`marketing`, `engineering`)

Example label structure:

```yaml
kind: role
version: v7
metadata:

>   name: senior-developer

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  name: backend-developer
```

In most organizations, access is based on what team you are part of, not your job level.

```

### Maintaining your labeling strategy

- **Regular review:** Regular audits of your labeling scheme are essential for maintaining an effective RBAC system. Your organization's structure 
and needs evolve over time, so your labels should be reviewed to ensure they accurately reflect these changes. 
- **Documentation:** Maintaining consistency across your organization. Include clear guidelines for label naming conventions to ensure 
standardization and prevent confusion as your team grows and your infrastructure expands.
- **Automation:** Implementing automation in your labeling strategy will maintain consistency and reduce human error as your system scales and evolves. 

### Common use cases examples

Here are some examples of common patterns in Teleport labels.

#### Basic developer access

This role allows access to servers with the `env:staging` and `env:dev` labels
and Kubernetes clusters with the `env:dev` label:

```yaml
kind: role
version: v7
metadata:
  name: developer
spec:
  allow:
    logins: ['dev']
    node_labels:
      'env': ['staging', 'dev']
    kubernetes_labels:
      'env': 'dev'
```

#### Read-only auditor

> This role allows a user to read audit log entries:

Reviewer 2: I don't think this is correct. The `session` resource is related to active sessions, but it's not used much in modern Teleport. I'd probably just eliminate this example to avoid opening up that can of worms.

Plus, Teleport comes with a preset `auditor` role so it's a bit awkward to provide an example that conflicts with the existing name.

Author: Deleted this example

```yaml
kind: role
version: v7
metadata:
  name: auditor
spec:
  allow:
    rules:
      - resources: ['session']
        verbs: ['list', 'read']
```

### RBAC for specific kinds of resources

You can label all Teleport-protected resources and use those labels to set RBAC
policies. In addition, each kind of Teleport resource also has more specific
attributes that you can use to control access. Read the guides below to refine
your RBAC for each kind of resource:

- [Servers](../../enroll-resources/server-access/rbac.mdx)
- [Databases](../../enroll-resources/database-access/rbac.mdx)
- [Kubernetes clusters](../../enroll-resources/kubernetes-access/controls.mdx)
- [Remote desktops](../../enroll-resources/desktop-access/rbac.mdx)
- [Web applications](../../enroll-resources/application-access/controls.mdx)

### Best practices

> Keep these key principles in mind to maintain a secure environment:

Reviewer 2: This section seems duplicative with lines 316-320.

Author: There's a little overlap but the preceding lines were specifically about labeling strategy vs general guidelines. If you think this isn't useful though I will delete it.

`env:local-prod` label.

1. Create a file called `role.yaml` with the following content:

   ```yaml
   kind: role
   version: v7
   metadata:
     name: local-dev-only
   spec:
     allow:
       logins: [root]
       node_labels:
         env: local-dev
   ```

   The `allow` block indicates what the user is allowed to access. By default,
   nothing is allowed, so each role must include at least one `allow` field to
   provide permissions.  

   The `spec.allow.logins` field allows the user to assume the `root` login when
   connecting to a server. You can change this to a less permissive login, but
   we are using `root` because it is the only available login on the Docker
   containers we spun up.

   `spec.allow.node_labels` uses wildcard syntax, which matches one or more
   characters, to allow users to connect to any server with a label that begins
   `env:local-`, such as the `env:local-dev` and `env:local-prod` labels we
   assigned to our servers.

   However, since the `deny.node_labels` field specifies `env:local-prod`, a
   user with this role would only be able to access the server with the

>    `env:local-dev` label.

Reviewer 3: i'm not suggesting adding it, but the example role doesn't actually contain any `deny` section, we could just say they would only be allowed to access nodes with `env:local-dev`

1. Create the role:

   ```code
   $ tctl create role.yaml
   ```

## Step 3/3. Access your server

In this step, you will create a local Teleport user with the `local-dev-access`
role, then list available servers and connect the one with the label
`env:local-dev`.

1. Create a local user named `alice` with the `local-dev-access` role:

   ```code
   $ tctl users add alice --roles=local-dev-access
   ```

1. Follow the instructions in your terminal to sign in as `alice`.

1. In your terminal, log out of your cluster and log in again:

   ```code
   $ tsh logout
   $ tsh login --user=alice --proxy=<Var name="example.teleport.sh" />
   ```

1. List all servers available for your user to access. You should only see one:

   ```code
   $ tsh ls
   Node Name    Address    Labels
   ------------ ---------- -------------
   ba2290caf694 ⟵ Tunnel   env=local-dev
   ```

>    Since `alice` is denied access to servers with the `env:local-prod` label,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   Since `alice` is not allowed access to servers with the `env:local-prod` label,
```

   only the server with the `env:local-dev` label is available to connect to.

1. Access the server using the value of the `Node Name` field as shown in `tsh
   ls`:

   ```code

>    $ tsh ssh root@<Var name="ba2290caf694" />

Reviewer 3: do our docker containers actually allow SSH access? i get this error
```
$ tsh ssh root@8db48991d7b6
Failed to launch: fork/exec /sbin/nologin: no such file or directory.
ERROR: Process exited with status 255
```

   ```

## Next steps

> In this guide, you created a Teleport role that allowed and denied access to SSH

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In this guide, you created a Teleport role that allowed access to SSH
```
